this video series is brought to you by
polygon make better renders faster
time for something fun
we are gonna be uh i mean working with a
donut should be fun
enough but uh but this part is
particularly fun we're gonna be making
uh both the doughnut and the icing on it
look more shapely so we're gonna use
sculpting to make this part look gloopy
and like real icing and it's a lot of
fun
um
so before we do the sculpting though
sculpting will uh it'll work but we only
the only detail we have is what is
available to us in edit mode like if
we're sculpting on a donut this is all
the detail we have so really we want to
have a lot more detail than what we've
got currently so over here in your
modifier section we've got the
subdivision modifier and there's a
button we can apply it and if we hit
apply it'll apply that detail to the to
our donut but before i do that it's a
good idea to have a copy
of what it is before you're going to
apply it just in case you need to go
back
and i say this from like years of using
blender like you know you hit apply on
something you can't go back by the way
like a modifier it's it's there and you
can revisit it at any time but once it's
applied it's like it's done so um that's
why i think it's a good idea to keep a
copy of it so what i'm going to do is
i'm going to select both my donut and my
icing i'm going to hit shift d
and that's created oh if you see it
snapping like this by the way that's
because your snapping tool is still
turned on so anyways i have duplicated
it and you can see up here we've now got
two donuts and two icings and on i'm
gonna select whoops select my donut and
my icing and i'm gonna hit m so m is
gonna move it to a collection so
collections are at the top here we can
see we've got
a collection just the default collection
so what i want to do is i want to move
it to a new collection and then i'm
going to hide that collection so um
doughnut
my doughnut
zero zero one and whatever don't know
ising001 i'm gonna move those to a new
collection like this and i'm gonna call
this
archive i just i call it archive just to
keep it out of the way and then i'll
just
i'll call this original
just in case i want to come back to them
and then i'm gonna uh on this new
collection here i'm just gonna uncheck
that box next to it so now i've still
got my donut and icing but if i want to
i can access another version of them so
that's just a way you know safety
precaution for you
okay so with my donut here select this
is the one that we're gonna sculpt on
first
i'm gonna hit apply on my subdivision
surface and there we go we've got all
this detail here to work with so now if
i go to sculpting so along the top
navigation bar there sculpting
zoom in a bit
um now we've got this so we are in
sculpt mode
and uh
the the hotkey you should remember which
has been turned off for some reason
there we go um is f if you want to
change the size of your brush it is f
um and there's also like okay where's
the other settings for your brush so
uh
if for some reason it's disabled i'm
pretty sure it's like the future version
of blender will have it enabled by
default but if you right-click one of
these buttons here and then along the
header where it says header just go show
tool settings then you'll actually get
the settings that really should be there
from the start so i don't know why it's
not there by default but that's how you
bring it in if you can't see it anyways
now that i've got this yeah i could
change my radius there
and i can also change my strength hey
thank you for the reminder spider it's
always at the wrong time
okay now if i was to just draw on my
mesh
you can see that we are
uh sculpting we're pulling parts of the
mesh out but you'll notice we're also
pulling another part of the mesh out the
reason for that is that by default x
symmetry mirror is turned on so it's
useful if you're sculpting a face but
we're sculpting a donut and that's very
annoying so i'm turning that off and now
when i sculpt you can see we're pulling
that out now
if i was to go into uh edit mode just to
show you
it's pulled that out that's exactly what
it's doing right now all it's doing is
it's taking the mesh and it is deforming
it in a way
that's appropriate for sculpting
so um you might wonder what's the
difference between sculpting and edit
mode i mean not a lot like you could do
this next step like in you know edit
mode and do proportional editing and all
that kind of thing but um it's just
different ways of working like some ways
especially when we do like you know the
deforming of the the gluby bits of the
icing it's just easier to do with
sculpting now in the case of our donor
what we're going to do is we want to
make it look
like
because basically the way donuts are
made is they come out of a fryer
i actually filmed it actually i went to
a donut shop and filmed it but it comes
out of a fried like it sits in
a deep fryer and it sits there bubbling
and then they flip it over and then the
other side but basically the part that
is like floating like along the level
part of the donut is um
uh it's uncooked it's less cooked than
the rest of it so it's usually
um
like the parts around it are sticking
out a little bit more than the middle so
essentially if i can find a good photo
of it this one
right there you can kind of see it there
this might actually be a bagel i don't
know what the american bagel company is
it might be a bagel i don't know but
basically like the more cooked it is i
believe the more um
it'll like build the yeast or whatever
right it'll kind of ex like expand it a
little bit more anyways point is is the
part around the middle i want to make it
small i want to make it shrunken a
little bit
so if i was to just draw it's actually
going to pull it out but if i hold down
control
as i draw
you can see that it's actually pushing
it in and that is what i want to do so
i'm just going to go around it
just like this
this isn't particularly fancy
but it does the job
um
yeah
by the way i'm doing this with a mouse
and i do have a stylus but i'm doing it
with a mouse because i know most people
watching just have a mouse a stylus will
be immediately better for sculpting
because you have pen pressure and you
can like taper off strokes just with 10
pen pressure like it's so much better
with a stylus um
so you know if you get serious about
sculpting or blender at some point it's
probably a good investment but
i'm doing it with a mouse so you can too
okay so that's okay but having a look at
this we need a little bit more detail
it's a little bit low res so i'm going
back to layout mode i'm just gonna
add another subsurf modifier so i'll
just add one here
make sure when you apply it by the way
it'll apply whatever is in viewport
subdivision right so um it's just going
to apply that so i'm just going to hit
apply and there we go got a little bit
more to play with now back to sculpt
mode and away we go
i did that step deliberately by the way
because i know uh
you know i i want to show you like the
thought process of uh how you solve
these sorts of problems
so um
yeah as you can see pretty uh pretty
simple don't want to go too far you know
by the way the keyboard shortcuts like
shift f will actually be the strength so
if you don't want to have to keep going
up there you can just hit shift f and
you can control there and then f is the
size of the brush so i use f a lot shift
f not so much because it's a little
weird to me but um yeah anyway
uh
yeah that's pretty cool we could also
change to like a smooth brush like if
you go too far you could kind of smooth
it out a little bit yeah let's try using
shift f there we go
um
yeah you can kind of control it like
that uh but okay so that is the donut i
might actually just while i'm here
actually let me have a look i didn't
even do this for my um my donut but what
does the inside of a donut look like
nothing uh it looks exact it looks
completely perfectly round
um
well you know nothing's perfect so i'm
gonna just like i don't know
i'm gonna hold down control and i'm just
gonna like add a little bit of detail
here like some detail is better than no
detail
right even if it's just like a tiny
little bit it's better than it just
looking completely perfect because
nothing is completely perfect in the
real world
okay so the donut part is good now
we're gonna do uh similar steps but for
the icing so i'm going to apply my
solidifier modifier
first and then the next one is the
subsurf modifier let me just unhide the
rest of the mesh just in case
that causes problems later on because it
can in your sculpt mode you won't be
able to see it um and the other thing
i'm just going to increase my subsurf
modifier just to give myself a little
bit more detail in the sculpting stage
so i'm applying that to level three
apply and now
this is the detail level that we have to
work with so i'm going to sculpt mode
now
and along my brushes here the one i'm
going to use is called inflate and this
i'm going to use
whoops
um
yeah the clip start i believe we did
this yeah we did this in the previous
tutorial but changing the clip start i
believe i guess there's a different clip
start for different modes
but anyways so i'm changing that so i
can get in close
inflate will allow me to sculpt
and what it's going to do is it's going
to pull
yeah it's kind of almost like it's like
sticking inside the mesh and it's like
inflating it slightly and it's going to
create a like a dripping effect which is
very very common for um for droplets
like you can see just along that edge
there that's really hard to uh
hard to get there but basically wherever
there's a better photo maybe
wherever the the liquid builds up like
as gravity pulls it down it's obviously
going to be more built up there so
essentially i'm just doing a couple of
clips
clicks obviously clicks not clips
to uh to make it look a little bit
gloopy so one two three
maybe something like that
this is where you don't copy
me exactly
you uh you see what i'm doing and then
you apply it to yours because um
just a couple of clips because your your
version is obviously going to be
different to mine you're going to have
little droplets in different places
um so it's just a matter of picking the
droplets and just sculpting a little bit
of detail just make sure that the tip of
it you know make it look like the weight
of it
like it really is like
the ball of the the the dripping icing
is like at the head of it at the very
bottom of it right
the inflate brush is really good for
this um it's really handy i'll do a
little bit for this part here as well
it's pretty good
a little bit here maybe
maybe i don't know it's a little
looks a little bit weird
um
and you just go along it
it's kind of relaxing
it's quite a fun step i like this part
you just kind of imitate how liquid
forms
yeah man hardcore
cool cool stuff um
cool so that's about that now we can
switch of course to the smooth step if
you go too far you can like
smooth something out
if it looks a little bit odd um but
that's okay by the way we will
the parts that are sticking out don't
worry about that we'll go back to the
edit and we'll uh we'll move those in
but for now it's okay
oh that part needs to be smoothed a bit
it looks a little bit odd
but that's cool i also i i i guess we
forgot to do it for like the edit stage
we forgot to like kind of like do this
in a part ring here as well so actually
what i was just preparing for this
tutorial i was like let's see if i can
actually fix it just in sculpt and just
add a few like little droplet bits and
uh yeah you kind of can because like the
inner part of a donut it's not going to
have like lots of liquid that's like
going to be dribbling down or whatever
but it's going to have a little bit like
it's not going to be a perfectly clean
edge so i'm just using the grab brush
and i'm just like pulling randomly
around here
like so like it's kind of like been
pinched in a little bit and then i'll
also use like the inflate brush and i'll
inflate like little bits of it maybe
just like a little bit just like running
along the edge
as i said something is better than
nothing
all right that's pretty good and then
the only other thing we are going to do
is use draw mode
with a small strength
0.2 or something like that
and i'm just going to create a little
bit of random
displacement across my icing here
because we got the sculpt brush out why
not right
gone to the trouble of preparing the
mesh so that we can sculpt on it
might as well add in a little bit of
detail because the real world like i
mean as if icing could ever be
perfectly just the right amount of milk
like point or was it two
25 millimeters that we used for the uh
for the solidify modifier like it's
never going to be as perfect as that in
the real world so
there's going to be parts that are going
to have more icing thicker icing
less than others etc so
it's just adding in that diesel you can
also hold down control of course to go
the other direction and then if you go
too far you can smooth it out a little
bit as well
this is uh you know it's getting a
painting sort of look to it
but that's kind of cool it looks a
little bit like icing
okay so going back to layout mode
um you'll see you know as i mentioned
you've got parts that are like sticking
out obviously that's not going to be
like that for a i mean maybe if it was
like frozen in time as the droplet fell
but it's uh we want it to stick to the
doughnut so in edit mode we have a lot
more vertices to play with and this is
by the way where it comes to like as i
mentioned like you want to have as few
vertices as possible whilst you're
editing this is what i mean like this is
really hard to control this mesh right
now because there's so much going on
with it but as it turns out we really
just need to just like move that part in
a little bit so provided we have
proportional editing turned on and we've
got it set to smooth if i grab
that little piece there turn up my
proportional editing and i pull that in
and also i'm going to use rotate so r to
rotate
why is that turned off
it just randomly turns off the
screencast tool so you can't see what
i'm pressing pressing
um which is annoying so my apologies if
sometimes i'm using stuff on here and
the the tool is turned off it's just uh
it's a little
buggy it's a great add-on you know props
to whoever made it it's very handy but
a little buggy
um
so i'll just pull that in a little bit
there we go
like that so you just want to make it
look like it's obviously hugging the
donut
like it's really part of the donut
and uh
yeah just do that for the rest of it
we have gone over though so we will do
that i will do that off camera
just continue this for all of the
droplets along the thing
thank you for watching go ahead and join
me in the next part as we uh continue
making the donut i believe we're doing
materials next so click here and i will
see you in the next video